---
title: "Reasons for Withrawing from the Churches of God"
date: "2019-01-01"
categories: []
tags: [L-003]
typora-root-url: ../../public/
bibliography: Library.bib
draft: true
---

## Distinctives

### Church and Churches of God

- the "Church and Churches of God"
- the Church in reference to the church [singular] of the Living God. A group of singular churches who have achieved perfect unity, become "one church" like the churches in Asia/Judea etc who had achieved this end goal 

#### What They Got Right

- The distinction between the 'Church the Body', and the 'Churches of God'.
- 'the scriptural terms “the Church the Body” and “the Church of God” (or “Churches of God”) are not interchangeable, for they do not describe the same people.' [@cog2018a]
- The Exclusive Brethren 'One Body' The RCC 'Catholic Church' conflate the 2 concepts into the one.
- I believe this to be in error.
- Where the Church the Body is a singular entity consisting of all believers, early christian communities where clearly refered to as multiple singular entities known refered to as 'Churches' (e.g. Jerusalem, Corinth, )
- Each local assembly is a Church of God
- The clear issue sits where they define the 

#### What They Got Wrong

- The movement's primary distinctive banner 'Churches of God ... In Fellowship of the Son of God, the Lord Jesus Christ'.
- This is their legal title
- This phrase is made of two parts from different Scriptures, the first being in reference to the multiple instances in which the epistles refer to groups of believers as a 'Church of God' or 'Churches of God'.
- The second part is a reference to 1 Cor 1:9.
- The 'What We Believe' section on their website lists beliefs commonly accepted throughout the majority of evangelical churches who hold to believers baptism. They profess:
  - the authority of scripture
  - the trinity
  - salvation faith in Christ alone
  - the Holy Spirits presence in every believer
  - full submersion believers baptism.
  - 'in the command for baptised believers to serve God, being added to local church of God fellowship, and in fellowship with other churches of God worldwide.' [@cog2018]
- The final one would not generally appear on most statements of faith
- The reason why it's listed here because it highlights one of the movements more significant distinctives.



- When the article refers to being in fellowship with 'other churches of God', they are refering only to approved assemblies who are in full association with the movement.
- In other words, the Churches of God would not consider themselves 'in fellowship' with any believer (or group of believers) associated with a non-approved fellowship.
- This would be similar to the Circle of Fellowship of the Exclusive Brethren
- Other terms used to
	- In the Lord

### In Fellowship of the Son

- In Fellowship of the Son of God, the Lord Jesus Christ
- So what does 'in fellowship' mean?
- This term is taken from 1 Cor 1:9 (listorically also included Acts 2:42)

### Three Sphere Ecclesiology

- **Local Sphere**
	- The geographical boundry of a local sphere is defined by the boundry of a city or town (e.g. The Church of God in Glasgow/Manchester).
	- This can sometimes consist of multiple 'companies'.
	- Governed by a plurality of elders.
	- The biblical justification for this is the fact that, even though there were hundreds of believers in the early churches (e.g. Jerusalem) who met at each other's homes to break bread, they were considered collectively as the 'Church of God in Jerusalem'.
	- It is worth noting that this was a ecclesiastical system taught and implemented in Exclusive Brethren circles at the time of Darby. 
- **District Sphere**
	- The district sphere is a group of local churches

- **Worldwide Sphere**

### Other Key Phrases

- Other than the above, the movement have adopted some key verses as their slogans.
  - ''...that they may be one' (Jn 17:21)
  - guarding the good deposit (2 Tim 1:14)
  - Global
  - First Century Convictions

## In the Lord

- A blog article which tackles the Brethren "One Place "
- "rather than discerning whether a gathering is a biblical assembly or not based on the Word of God, we pick the group we're in, and use it to define exactly what an assembly should look like. We get our test of fellowship backward, because we start with the assumption that our group is correct. Worse, we declare ourselves to have the Lord's Presence, then use that to excuse all the corruption and sin we see. Is the priest molesting the altar boys? don't worry, just trust in the Mother Church! In our own circles, we're told that all the problems we see are "weakness". The fact that we condemn other churches for the same things is irrelevant, because we gather to the Lord's Name and they don't."
- They declare themselves to have the Lord's presence
- All other assemblies 

'the Churches of God "guard the good deposit" (2 Timothy 1:14) by maintaining first century Bible convictions' [@cog2018]

-





'God delivered a body of teaching (referred to in the New Testament as ‘the Faith’, or ‘the apostles teaching’) which, when consistently held, results in a practical, observable unity.' [@cog2018a]

'Churches of God' ... ‘the little flock’, ‘a holy nation’, ‘the kingdom of God’, a ‘holy’ and ‘royal’ ‘priesthood’



This article will attempt to explain some of my reasons for withdrawing from the Churches of God. I'm not sure if I will publish this article or keep it for my own record as a reminder why I had left (if your reading this, then we'll assume I've decided to publish it).

In 2018, at the age of 31, I had requested to be no longer under the care or leadership of the Elders of Church who met in Shiloh Hall Church, Glasgow. The church was associated with in Glasgow with a local church which was associated under the banner of 'The Churches of God, in the Fellowship of the Son of God, the Lord Jesus Christ' and it's associated teachings. This was not an easy decision to make and one that took much prayer and study. I have been part of this group of churches for my whole life (31 years), and as an associate member for 10 years. It was through the camp works that I came to know the Lord as my saviour and where I have served. In 2018, I decided to withdraw my association with the group.

This decision came about from many years of struggling with their exclusive positions in the subjects of association with other Christians/Christian groups and on the nature of the 'house of God'.

> "What I mean is that each one of you says, “I follow Paul,” or “I follow Apollos,” or “I follow Cephas,” or “I follow Christ.” Is Christ divided?"
> — 1Cor 1:12-13a

*Distinctives of the churches of God*

**They take historical needed truth understandings over main steam scholars**

Comparitive studies are key to understanding the context of a passage



**misenterpretation of the “the flock” as referring to the “whole flock”**

Apart from the obvious parallel verse, there is no scriptural prescribed system of ecclesiastical authority system out with the local church.



## Similarities with Other Christian Movements

### Open Brethren



### Exclusive Brethren

- Metropolitan connexial governance

### Churches of God Offshoots

- Green Pastures (aka Vernalite)
- The Green Pastures assemblies were a group of offshoot assemblies (mainly in Scotland) who maintained the understandings of the 'Churches of God' and the 'Church the Body' distinction, but rejected the inter-connexial governance structure of the main group of assemblies.
- They believed that, in the case of an established church, no person or group out with the local sphere had any authority over the memebers in the local sphere.

### The divisive mindset

The Plymouth Brethren movement has been a divisive movement with the 'leave your church because we more accurately teach and practice the truth' mindset. Protestant Christianity throughout the years been cursed with this divisive mindset which has caused major , but movemebts like the Plymouth Brethren movement and the CoG seem to be the main culprates.

The CoG movement seems to have adopted this divisive attitude as one of their primary distinctives.

I've learned that there are movements with a unity mindset who see the idea of 'encouraging partnerships' of Philipians 1:5. Non-profit organisations like 'FIEC' and 'the west of Scotland partnership' are 2 examples which are set up to encourage each other in the gospel without holding any ecclesiastical authority.

rather than 'join us or your not a true church'.

This is another test peice this time with {% cite ironside1942 %}

## 11 Reasons Why I Withdrew From the Churches of God

### The Title “Churches of God"

This may seem like a strange one to have on the top of my list. The bible afterall describes the local churches in the majority of the letters as this title (1Cor 1:2;). In contrast, the "Churches of God" embrace their title, using it as a dillibirate attempt differentiate themselves from rest of Christianity.

It was my reading of Pauls letter to the Corinthian church that helped me realise the significance of this mindset. Consider this passage in 1 Corinthians:

> "What I mean is that each one of you says, “I follow Paul,” or “I follow Apollos,” or “I follow Cephas,” or “I follow Christ.” Is Christ divided?"
> — 1Cor 1:12-13a

Paul

Many commentators attribute most of the issues attribute the majority of the issues in the first letter to the Corinthian church to this this “I follow Christ” group. One commentators comments they seemed to believe they had an exclusive relationship with Jesus Christ that the other groups didn’t possess. In my study into various divisive movements (LDS, JWs, CoC etc,) many have the common theme of calling them selves the Church of Christ/Jesus Christ/Worldwide Church of God/

If you apply that title only to your movement, then you are in danger only applying it within you bubble, neglecting the rest of the body of Christ which it must be applied to. Over the last 200 years, we have seen many 'restorationism' movements who have come out of the "2nd great awakening". Many tired of sectarian christianity made a move to restore the pattern of the early apostolic church. Movements such as and later the Jehovah Witnesses, and Plymouth Brethren. These movements addopted the terms 'Church of Christ' (stone-campbell movement), 'Church of Jesus Christ' (LDS), 'Worldwide Church of God' (Armstrongism), 'Church of God' (7th Day Adventists), 'Disciples of Christ' (JWs), 'Church of God' (Black Hebrew Israelites). These are all well known exclusive groups, the majority of which have written off mainstream christianity as falling back into "apostate" Christiandom.

In my reading the history of the Brethren mevement, I was interested to learn that many today don't accept the designation 'Brethren' as they feel it "sets them apart as a division within Christianity" (Choosing instead to simply call them selves "Christians" or "Evangelicals").{% cite bahn2017 %} This attitude I believe to be more inline with God's will that we learn about in Paul's teaching.



---





## Not Reasons for Leaving

### The lack/decline in number

Noah kept faith regardless of the fact that no-one but his family listened to him. If I was convicted that what we had in our movement was true, I would have stayed regardless of the numbers {% cite mohler2018a %}

### Individuals in the church

I love and respect all those in the church of God and have appreciated their patient time, prayer and hard work they have put into me though out the years. Many of those men are not in the movement any more, but many still are and are a still continued help and support. You have demonstrated by your friuts that you are of God.{% cite ironside1942 %}

### Erronous Teaching

- I did not leave because of the errenous teachings. It was more by in-ability to maintain a disagreement while maintaining unity within my local assembly and beyond.

## Distinctives of the churches of God

**they would take historical needed truth understandings over main steam scholars**

Comparitive studies are key to understanding the context of a passage. I have been exploring various understandings of mainline biblical scholars who. To refer solely back to needed truth articles for our understandings of passages suggest we believe that there are no worthwhile insights in biblical interpretation in the last 100-110 years are worth pursuing is a grave mistake. This is from observation but is also supported by the fact we still maintain our

Do we truly believe that any new insights will solely come from within our movement? What about the rest of the body? Paul teaches that those members of the body we consider less honourable we below with greater honor. Writing off all christians who do not 100% align with our unserstandings in all aspects of doctine is a damaging and divisive mindset. A mindset that Paul wrote against in 1 Corinth.

We live in a very different environment and parts of the scriptures will need to be considered. Views on the role of women in prayer, spiritual gifts. There are biblical basis for these things that we seem to write off based on our traditions and have no time for. Regardless if they are right or not, Paul’s message in 1 Corinth seems to say there is more important things than being right. Namely unity for the sake of the Gospel to include all believers who are not walking in moral disobedience against God.

To write off a whole group of christians because they don’t share your doctrinal positions is an unbiblical divisive mindset that I believe Paul to be directly addressing in his letter. When I worked in Edinburgh, I had the opportunity to join a friend at his Wednesday evening bible studies at a gospel hall church. I attended the bible study for almost 3 years and had gotten to know the movement very well and the beliefs they held, even witnessing a breaking of bread service. What I discovered is that the differences between the two movement were the width of a hair. One had the bread and wine at the beginning, the other at the end. They used slightly different phrases in their prayers and teaching which demonstrated their theological differences. Behind the scenes, there would be a difference in how a church go about recognising elders if moving from another church, but nothing you would see unless part of the oversight.

The key thing that I noticed that, (1) they had maintained the traditional understanding of the gospel hall movement despite having no ecclesiastical authority outwit the local church (2) the do not have ‘informal’ meetings unless meeting at each others houses.

The lack of informal meetings resulted in a more consistent practice throughout all their church meetings including their family services, Sunday schools, gospel meetings, conferences. All meetings were considered suit & tie, female head coverings/silence, no instruments, .

The CoG churches have distinct ‘formal’ and ‘informal’ meetings. Their informal conferences (YFR, YPM, Convention 242) and local meetings (gospel meetings, family services, , many the biblical principles were relaxed (headcoverings, instruments,). The informal meetings and conferences quite often would emphasis the importance of the formal meeting, giving  guidance on how to prepare our thoughts for the Sunday morning worship, learning new songs to use on the Sunday morning, teaching on the importance of head coverings in church (taught by a women not wearing a head covering).

I don’t want to emphisis this “formal vs informal” distinction too much but I just want to use it as a demonstration that the differences between the formal meetings are about the width of a hair

They had leadership conferences, but the decisions reached in these conferences were not authoritive.


**Emphasis on the house of God teachings**

This is made manifest by the overwhelming majority of the elders and teachers. Its emphised at conferences, ministries, bible studies and in our Sunday morning worship.







*Distinctives of the Plymouth Brethren movement*

**The divisive mindset**

The Plymouth Brethren movement has been a divisive movement with the 'leave your church because we more accurately teach and practice the truth' mindset. Protestant Christianity has been cursed with the mindset following the step away from the RCC movement, but movemebts like the Exclusive Brethren, Churches of God, Churches of Christ  seem to take this one step further by asking christians to come out of their gospel preaching churches and join them in the ‘restored church’.  The CoG movement seems to have adopted this divisive attitude as one of their primary distinctives in a different way. From what I’ve learned about the early days of the movement, they put the call out to all churches to come under their ecclesiastical structure, and would reject any church which refused to joined with them as not a true church as they did not fall under the biblical pattern for ecclesiastical authority.



The Plymouth Brethren movement has been a divisive movement with the 'leave your church because we more accurately teach and practice the truth' mindset. Protestant Christianity has been cursed with the mindset, but movemebts like the Plymouth Brethren movement and the CoG seem to be the main culprates.

The CoG movement seems to have adopted this divisive attitude as one of their primary distinctives.

I've learned that there are movements with a unity mindset who see the idea of 'encouraging partnerships' of Philipians 1:5. Non-profit organisations like 'FIEC' and 'the west of Scotland partnership' are 2 examples which are set up to encourage each other in the gospel without holding any ecclesiastical authority.

rather than 'join us or your not a true church'.



**misenterpretation of the “the flock” as referring to the “whole flock”**

Apart from the obvious parallel verse, there is no scriptural prescribed system of ecclesiastical authority system out with the local church.



*Summary*

[Summary of the reasons for leaving]

[Summary of the solution I’ve chosen instead and advice for those part of the movement]

I've learned that there are movements with a unity mindset who see the idea of 'encouraging partnerships' of Philipians 1:5. Non-profit organisations like 'FIEC' and 'the west of Scotland partnership' are 2 examples which are set up to encourage each other in the gospel without holding any ecclesiastical authority.

Reconsider the understandings of “The Fellowship” and “The Flock” as individual churches.

rather than 'join us or your not a true church'.

**The name the “Churches of God” title**



Paul taught specifically against this mindset. He even specifically rebukes a group with a similar party slogan:

> "What I mean is that each one of you says, “I follow Paul,” or “I follow Apollos,” or “I follow Cephas,” or “I follow Christ.” Is Christ divided?"
> — 1Cor 1:12-13a

Many commentators attribute most of the issues attribute the majority of the issues in the first letter to the Corinthian church to this this “I follow Christ” group. One commentators comments they seemed to believe they had an exclusive relationship with Jesus Christ that the other groups didn’t possess. In my study into various divisive movements (LDS, JWs, CoC etc,) many have the common theme of calling them selves the Church of Christ/Jesus Christ/Worldwide Church of God/

Restorationism movements (2nd great awakening)
[Restorationism - Wikipedia](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Restorationism)
Worldwide Church of God; Church of God, International (non-trinitarian; binitarian)
LDS - church of Jesus christ
Stone-campbell - church of christ
7th Day Baptist and Adventist - Church of God

Distincives

- Rejection and disassociation from mainstream Christianity
- non-trinitarian (churches of god do not reject the trinity but take a strong stance on the recipient of the worship should be solely the father and not the son/Holy Spirit . The son/Holy Spirit can be worshiped but only in the context of the godhead)

### Correct Teaching on primary subjects is more important than impleneting secondary subjects

The Churches of God teach errounous teachings on arguably the most important doctrine taight by Christ - The Kingdom of God.

William Laing Craig had this to say about the Plymouth Brethren Meetings:

> "In fact, I would say that of the churches that I’ve worshiped in the one that would probably have the most plausible claim to be like the New Testament church would be the Brethren. When we were in England, we worshiped at a Plymouth Brethren church. In these churches there was no appointed minister who would preach every Sunday. Instead there were elders. Anyone could stand up during the service and share a song or a Scripture reading or give an exhortation. It sounded very much like the kind of worship service that you have in 1 Corinthians 12 to 14 where various prophets would get up and speak and the others would weigh what is said. That sort of worship service to me probably comes closest to what was going on in the New Testament in these local communities where there were no professional clergy and there were just local Christian groups that would meet together."

He goes on to say this:

> "But we don’t need to try to imitate the style of worship of these early churches. What we need to be sure is that we are on the same page with them doctrinally and in what we believe and in our common mission to fulfill the Great Commission and preach the Gospel to every nation, baptizing them and making disciples in the name of the Lord."

He recognises that correct doctrine on primary importance doctrines is more important than perfect implentation of New Testement church pattern.

I would agree with him. There would be no point

Take for example the Church of Christ governance structure. At a local sphere, they have no clergy, are congregational, plural-elder led. But they fall down at a key primary importance doctrine where they believe that baptism is required for salvation.

I also believe that if churches were to adopt a similar structure to the New Testament church, we wouldn't have the problems that exist in Christendom

## Speculative Conclusions

- While the apostle Paul puts an emphasis on what each believer has in common, the CoG movement seems to put their emphasis on what makes them unique.
- This is clear from with their slogans 'Churches of God ... in Fellowship etc.', 'They May Be One' as well as the distinction between 'The Church of God' and the 'Church the Body'
- The fact that
- This is an intentional divide that they pride themselves in and is a

---
